21

FREEDOM IN A COMPLEX SOCIETY

Nineteenth century civilization was not destroyed by the external or internal attack of barbarians ; its vitality was not sapped by the devastations of World War I nor by the revolt of a socialist proletariat or a fascist lower middle class. Its failure was not the outcome of some alleged laws of economics such as that of the falling rate of profit or of under-consumption or overproduction. It disintegrated as the result of an entirely different set of causes : the measures which society adopted in order not to be, in its turn, annihilated by the action of the self-regulating market. Apart from exceptional circumstances such as existed in North America in the age of the open frontier, the conflict between the market and the elementary requirements of an organized Social life provided the century with its dynamics and produced the typical strains and stresses which ultimately destroyed that society. External wars merely hastened its destruction.

After a century of blind “improvement” man is restoring his “habitation.” If industrialism is not to extinguish the race, it must be subordinated to the requirements of man’s nature. The true criticism of market society is not that it was based on economics — in a sense, every and any society must be based on it — but that its economy was based on self-interest. Such an organization of economic life is entirely unnatural, in the strictly empirical sense of exceptional. Nineteenth century thinkers assumed that in his economic activity man strove for profit, that his materialistic propensities would induce him to choose the lesser instead of the greater effort and to expect payment for his labor; in short, that in his economic activity he would tend to abide by what they described as economic rationality, and that all contrary behavior was the result of outside interference. It followed that markets were natural institutions, that they would spontaneously arise if only men were let alone. Thus, nothing could be more normal than an economic system consisting of markets and under the sole control of market prices, and a human society based on such markets appeared, therefore, as the goal of all progress. Whatever the desirability or undesirability of such a society on moral grounds, its practicability — this was axiomatic — was grounded in the immutable characteristics of the race.

Actually, as we now know, the behavior of man both in his primitive state and right through the course of history has been almost the opposite from that implied in this view. Frank H. Knight’s “no specifically human motive is economic” applies not only to social life in general, but even to economic life itself. The tendency to barter, on which Adam Smith so confidently relied for his picture of primitive man, is not a common tendency of the human being in his economic activities, but a most infrequent one. Not only does the evidence of modem anthropology give the lie to these rationalistic constructs, but the history of trade and markets also has been completely different from that assumed in the harmonistic teachings of nineteenth century sociologists. Economic history reveals that the emergence of national markets was in no way the result of the gradual and spontaneous emancipation of the economic sphere from governmental control. On the contrary, the market has been the outcome of a conscious and often violent intervention on the part of government which imposed the market organization on society for noneconomic ends. And the self-regulating market of the nineteenth century turns out on closer inspection to be radically different from even its immediate predecessor in that it relied for its regulation on economic self-interest. The congenital weakness of nineteenth century society was not that it was industrial but that it was a market society. Industrial civilization will continue to exist when the utopian experiment of a self-regulating market will be no more than a horrible memory.

Yet the shifting of industrial civilization onto a new nonmarketing basis seems to many a task too desperate to contemplate. They fear an institutional vacuum or, even worse, the loss of freedom. Need these perils prevail?

Much of the massive suffering inseparable from a period of transition is already behind us. In the social and economic dislocation of our age, in the tragic vicissitudes of the depression, fluctuations of currency, mass unemployment, shiftings of social status, spectacular destruction of historical states, we have experienced the worst. Unwittingly we have been paying the price of the change. Far as mankind still is from having adapted itself to the use of machines, and great as the pending changes are, the restoration of the past is as impossible as the transferring of our troubles to another planet. Instead of eliminating the demonic forces of aggression and conquest, such a futile attempt would actually ensure the survival of those forces, even after their utter military defeat. The cause of evil would become endowed with the advantage, decisive in politics, of representing the possible, in opposition to that which is impossible of achievement however good it may be of intention.

Nor does the collapse of the traditional system leave us in the void. Not for the first time in history may makeshifts contain the germs of great and permanent institutions.

Within the nations we are witnessing a development under which the economic system ceases to lay down the law to society and the primacy of society over that system is secured. This may happen in a great variety of ways, democratic and aristocratic, constitutionalist and authoritarian, perhaps even in a fashion yet utterly unforeseen. The future in some countries may be already the present in others, while some may still embody the past of the rest. But the outcome is common with them all: the market system will no longer be self-regulating, even in principle, since it will not comprise labor, land, and money.

To take labor out of the market means a transformation as radical as was the establishment of a competitive labor market. The wage contract ceases to be a private contract except on subordinate and accessory points. Not only conditions in the factory, hours of work, and modalities of contract, but the basic wage itself, are determined outside the market ; what role accrues thereby to trade unions, state, and other public bodies depends not only on the character of these institutions but also on the actual organization of the management of production. Though in the nature of things wage differentials must
(and should) continue to play an essential part in the economic system, other motives than those directly involved in money incomes may outweigh by far the financial aspect of labor.

To remove the elements of production — land, labor, and money — poration of land with definite institutions such as the homestead, the co-operative, the factory, the township, the school, the church, parks, wild life preserves, and so on. However widespread individual ownership of farms will continue to be, contracts in respect to land tenure need deal with accessories only, since the essentials are removed from the jurisdiction of the market. The same applies to staple foods and organic raw materials, since the fixing of prices in respect to them is not left to the market. That for an infinite variety of products competitive markets continue to function need not interfere with the constitution of society any more than the fixing of prices outside the market for labor, land, and money interferes with the costing-function of prices in respect to the various products. The nature of property, of course, undergoes a deep change in consequence of such measures since there is no longer any need to allow incomes from the title of property to grow without bounds, merely in order to ensure employment, production, and the use of resources in society.

The removal of the control of money from the market is being accomplished in all countries in our day. Unconsciously, the creation of deposits effected this to a large extent, but the crisis of the gold standard in the twenties proved that the link between commodity money and token money had by no means been severed. Since the introduction of “functional finance” in all important states, the directing of investments and the regulation of the rate of saving have become government tasks.

To remove the elements of production — land, labor, and money —
from the market is thus a uniform act only from the viewpoint of the market, which was dealing with them as if they were commodities. From the viewpoint of human reality that which is restored by the disestablishment of the commodity fiction lies in all directions of the social compass. In effect, the disintegration of a uniform market economy is already giving rise to a variety of new societies. Also, the end of market society means in no way the absence of markets. These continue, in various fashions, to ensure the freedom of the consumer, to indicate the shifting of demand, to influence producers’ income, and to serve as an instrument of accountancy, while ceasing altogether to be an organ of economic self-regulation.

In its international methods, as in these internal methods, nineteenth century society was constricted by economics. The realm of fixed foreign exchanges was coincident with civilization. As long as the gold standard and — what became almost its corollary — constitutional regimes were in operation, the balance of power was a vehicle of peace. The system worked through the instrumentality of those Great Powers, first and foremost Great Britain, who were the center of world finance, and pressed for the establishment of representative government in less advanced countries. This was required as a check on the finances and currencies of debtor countries with the consequent need for controlled budgets, such as only responsible bodies can provide. Though, as a rule, such considerations were not consciously present in the minds of statesmen, this was the case only because the requirements of the gold standard ranked as axiomatic. The uniform world pattern of monetary and representative institutions was the result of the rigid economy of the period.

Two principles of nineteenth century international life derived their relevance from this situation: anarchistic sovereignty and “justified”
intervention in the affairs of other countries. Though apparently contradictory, the two were interrelated. Sovereignty, of course, was a purely political term, for under unregulated foreign trade and the gold standard governments possessed no powers in respect to international economics. They neither could nor would bind their countries in respect to monetary matters — this was the legal position. Actually, only countries which possessed a monetary system controlled by central banks were reckoned sovereign states. With the powerful Western countries this unlimited and unrestricted national monetary sovereignty was combined with its complete opposite, an unrelenting pressure to spread the fabric of market economy and market society elsewhere. Consequently, by the end of the nineteenth century the peoples of the world were institutionally standardized to a degree unknown before.

This system was hampering both on account of its elaborateness and its universality. Anarchistic sovereignty was a hindrance to all effective forms of international co-operation, as the history of the League of Nations strikingly proved; and enforced uniformity of domestic systems hovered as a permanent threat over the freedom of national development, especially in backward countries and sometimes even in advanced, but financially weak countries. Economic co-operation was limited to private institutions as rambling and ineffective as free trade, while actual collaboration between peoples, that is, between governments, could never even be envisaged.

The situation may well make two apparently incompatible demands on foreign policy : it will require closer co-operation between friendly countries than could even be contemplated under nineteenth century sovereignty, while at the same time the existence of regulated markets will make national governments more jealous of outside interference than ever before. However, with the disappearance of the automatic mechanism of the gold standard, governments will find it possible to drop the most obstructive feature of absolute sovereignty, the refusal to collaborate in international economics. At the same time it will become possible to tolerate willingly that other nations shape their domestic institutions according to their inclinations, thus transcending the pernicious nineteenth century dogma of the necessary uniformity of domestic regimes within the orbit of world economy. Out of the ruins of the Old World, cornerstones of the New can be seen to emerge : economic collaboration of governments and the liberty to organize national life at will. Under the constrictive system of free trade neither of these possibilities could have been conceived of, thus excluding a variety of methods of co-operation between nations. While under market economy and the gold standard the idea of federation was justly deemed a nightmare of centralization and uniformity, the end of market economy may well mean effective co-operation with domestic freedom.

The problem of freedom arises on two very different levels. The one is given by the balance of the increased or diminished freedoms ;
no radically new questions are encountered there. On the other level, as we shall see, the very possibility of freedom is at stake.

No significant balance of the freedoms lost and gained can be struck on the first level. The doomed right of the employer to hire and fire was just as much a corollary of the labor market as was the similarly outlived right of the employee to refuse a job without giving reasons, though the conditions be unexceptionable. Such arbitrary rights will be acknowledged just as little as those of the owner to the abuse of his land. In the international sphere also absolute sovereignty often meant freedom for some and servitude for others. Ultimately regulation both extends and restricts freedom. Vast and intricate political issues arise, but the meaning of freedom itself remains unproblematical.

Yet in a deeper sense the very possibility of freedom is today in doubt. To this anxious question the contents of the present book should supply an answer.

Market economy gave rise to false expectations by seeming to approximate the achievement of ideals which are intrinsically invalid, such as a society in which power and compulsion are absent, and a world in which force has no function. An illusionistic attitude was induced which postulated a society shaped by man’s wishes alone, while the inescapable alternatives of social existence, indeed the primary fact of the inevitability of society itself, were obscured. The institutional separation of politics from economics implied a denial of the validity of the political sphere, since economics was equated with contractual relations — allegedly the only true realm of freedom. The rest was abuse.

The discarding of the liberal utopia brings us face to face with reality. Power and value are part of it ; non-co-operation is impossible for any individual in regard to them. The function of power is to ensure that conformity which is needed for the survival of the group ;
its ultimate source is existing convictions — and who can help having convictions of some kind or other? Economic value has the function of ensuring the usefulness of the goods produced ; it is a seal set on the division of labor in society. Its source is human wants and scarcity — and how could a man be expected not to desire one thing more than another? Yet any conviction or any desire wiU make him a participant in the creation of power and in the constituting of economic value. No freedom to do otherwise is conceivable.

Power and value are a paradigm of social reality, which does not spring from human volition. The marketing mind maintained its illusion of freedom only at the price of blindness to the wider consequences of individual action. But institutional mechanisms are not subject to our wishes as to the way of their working. The market system, supposedly a realm of freedom, consists of self-willed devices the mechanics of which are of geometrical stringency. In an integrated society the truth becomes apparent, and the illusion of freedom fades. Ultimately it is on this level that the question of freedom must find its answer.

The primacy of values in the present crisis is rooted in the situation itself. The economic concept of society will disappear together with the dichotomy of politics and economics which it mirrored ; only in the economic society of liberal origin could the concept of sectional interests and pressure groups gain moral validity. But any idea that defines a society as a whole expresses a concept of human life and, hence, is ideological by definition. By asserting the primacy of ideals in the present transformation we merely insist on the postulate of the unity of society as the center of the crisis.

The difference between fascism, socialism, or any other competing notion today is not primarily economic. Even where they profess identical economics, they are not only different but are, indeed, embodiments of opposed principles. And the ultimate on which they separate is again freedom. The antecedents of the present catastrophe, and the catastrophe itself, have made knowledge of the reality of society, like the knowledge of death, a part of our consciousness. The issue on which men are dividing is whether in the light of this new knowledge the idea of freedom can be upheld or not ; is there such a thing as freedom in a complex society or is it a temptation designed to ruin man and his work?

We have invoked what we believe to be the three constitutive facts of the consciousness of Western man; knowledge of death, knowledge of freedom, and knowledge of society. The first, according to Jewish legend, was revealed in the Old Testament story. The second was revealed to Western man through the discovery of the uniqueness of the person in the teachings of Jesus as recorded in the New Testament. The third revelation reached us through living in an industrial society. It is the constituent element in modem man’s consciousness.

Robert Owen was the first in the industrial age to see that Christianity denied the reality of society. He called this the individualization of man by the Churches and appeared to believe that only in a cooperative commonwealth could “all that is truly valuable in Christianity” cease to be separated from man. To him it was given to recognize that Christianity was being transcended. For the freedom that western man gained through the teaching of Jesus was inapplicable to an industrial society. Robert Owen’s socialism was the upholding of man’s claim to freedom in such a society. The post-Christian era of western civilization had begun.

Fascism’s answer to the reality of society is to negate the second revelation and to reject the Christian discovery of individual man and universal mankind. This radical repudiation of freedom is the root of its degenerative bent. If industrial civilization shall not disintegrate or turn towards degenerative solutions, a recasting of the foundations of human consciousness is imperative. Only at this price can freedom be retained.

The discovery of society is, indeed, the anchor of freedom. Human consciousness was bom out of limitations to which man resigned him-, self. He accepted the reality of death and built his bodily life upon it ;
he resigned himself to the truth that there was more than bodily death, and founded his freedom on it ; he is, in our time, faced with the reality of society which deprives him of that freedom. By resigning himself to that reality as he resigned himself to death he becomes mature and able to exist as a human being in an industrial society. For out of this limitation also comes insight: in being bereft of our old freedom we learn that the freedom we lost was a mere illusion ; the freedom we gain is real. This is our condition today. As Robert Owen said in an inspired moment : “Should any of the causes of evil be irremovable by the new powers which men are about to acquire, they will know that they are necessary and unavoidable evils; and childish, unavailing complaints will cease to be made.” This is the meaning of freedom in a complex society.
